h1. Ken

h2. Introduction

Ken is a Data Layer for Knowledge Representation.

It's being built to access the Metaweb Services supplied by Freebase.com.
The project’s goals are the provision of a concise API for querying and writing.
Therefore it wraps the Metaweb Architecture to smart Ruby Objects.

You can navigate the Freebase Graph using a rubyish syntax.
Also you can use this library as a Data Layer (instead of or in addition to ActiveRecord/DataMapper) for your Web Framework of choice (Merb, Rails).

h2. Installation

Use GitHub RubyGems:

<pre>
<code>
  $ gem sources -a http://gems.github.com (you only have to do this once)
  $ sudo gem install michael-ken
</code>
</pre>

In your Ruby files add:

<pre>
<code>
  require 'rubygems'
  gem 'michael-ken'
  require 'ken'
</code>
</pre>


h2. Getting started

The first place to get started with Freebase is of course, Freebase. Try out their Browser at 
"http://www.freebase.com":http://www.freebase.com.

The Freebase Database can be thought of as a huge graph of interconnected nodes that represent 
knowledge (in a much more structured way than wikipedia does).
That graph can be viewed at a higher level through an object-oriented lens which leads to easier interaction.
To understand the fundamental Metaweb Architecture please read the official
"MQL Reference guide":http://download.freebase.com/MQLReferenceGuide.pdf (with focus on Chapter 2)
provided by Freebase.

In addition, you can learn a lot by employing the Freebase "Query Editor":http://www.freebase.com/tools/queryeditor/.

h3. Fetching a Resource

Let's ask Ken what he knows about the British Band New Order.

<pre>
<code>
  resource = Ken.get('/en/new_order') # => <Resource id="/en/new_order" name="New Order">
</code>
</pre>

h3. Inspecting the Types

Every Resource can have multiple types.

<pre>
<code>
  resource.types
  # => [ #<Type id="/film/music_contributor" name="Film music contributor">, #<Type id="/music/artist" name="Musical Artist">, 
         #<Type id="/common/topic" name="Topic">, #<Type id="/music/musical_group" name="Musical Group">,
         #<Type id="/broadcast/artist" name="Broadcast Artist">, #<Type id="/music/group_member" name="Musical Group Member"> ]
</code>
</pre>

We can see that New Order is a member of Music Artist, Film Music Contributor, Broadcast Artist and other types.

h3. Inspecting a Type's properties

A type defines a set of properties to describe a Resource.

<pre>
<code>
  resource.types.each do |type|
    type.properties # => e.g. [ #<Property id="/music/musical_group/member"> ]
  end
</code>
</pre>

We get sets of Properties for each Type. The Type Musical Group has just one Property @/music/musical_group/member@
named Members Of Musical Group.

h3. Listing all Attributes

After inspecting a Resource's Types and Properties we now know what we could know. But actually we don't know nothing :)
So it's time to ask for the values of properties, the so called _Attributes_.

~Note: In Ken's terminology we differ between _Properties_ and concrete Property instances, the _Attributes_, while
Freebase itself doesn't.~ 

<pre>
<code>
  resource.attributes.each do |att|
    att # => e.g. #<Attribute property="/music/artist/album">
    att.property.name # => e.g. "Albums"
    
    att.values
    # e.g. => [ #<Resource id="/guid/9202a8c04000641f8000000002fa2556" name="Ceremony">, 
                #<Resource id="/guid/9202a8c04000641f8000000002fa24d5" name="Procession">,
                #<Resource id="/guid/9202a8c04000641f8000000002fa20d3" name="Everything's Gone Green">, ... ]
    # e.g. => ["1980"]
  end
</code>
</pre>

Attributes are slightly more complicated to handle compared to Types and Properties.

There are four kinds of Attributes.
  * Unique Value Type
  * Unique Object Type
  * Non-unique Value Type
  * Non-unique Object
  
In order to be able to use unique and non-unique Attributes in the same manner we always wrap the value of an Attribute
in a Collection, no matter if there's one value or there are many.

h3. Group Attributes by their Type using Views


<pre>
<code>
  resource.views.each do |view|
    view # => e.g. #<View type="/music/artist">
    view.type # => e.g #<Type id="/music/artist" name="Musical Artist">
    view.attributes
    # => [#<Attribute property="/music/artist/home_page">, #<Attribute property="/music/artist/genre">,
          #<Attribute property="/music/artist/active_start">, #<Attribute property="/music/artist/similar_artist">,
          #<Attribute property="/music/artist/album">, #<Attribute property="/music/artist/label">,
          #<Attribute property="/music/artist/track">, #<Attribute property="/music/artist/origin">]
            
    view.attributes.each do |att|
      att.values
      # e.g. => [ #<Resource id="/en/alternative_dance" name="Alternative dance">,
                  #<Resource id="/en/synthpop" name="Synthpop">, 
                  #<Resource id="/en/house_music" name="House music">,
                  #<Resource id="/en/post-punk" name="Post-punk"> ]
      # e.g. => ["1980"]
    end
  end
</code>
</pre>

h3. Fetching multiple Resources using a query

As of now you can ask for multiple Resources by specifying a query.

<pre>
<code>
  resources = Ken.all(:name => "Apple", :type => "/music/album")
  # => [#<Resource id="/guid/9202a8c04000641f80000000031dae7c" name="Apple">,
        #<Resource id="/guid/9202a8c04000641f8000000007ce31ec" name="Apple">]
</code>
</pre>

Keep in mind that only the top level of the query is mapped to a Collection of Resource Objects.
So asking for values in a nested level does not make sense. Use nested statements just for
lowering the top level result.

However you can instead navigate the normal way to figure out that values.
_But won't that require another query to triggered? Certainly._

Let's look at a nested query:

<pre>
<code>
  query = {
    :directed_by => "George Lucas",
    :starring => [
      {
        :actor => "Harrison Ford"
      }
    ],
    :type => "/film/film"
  }
  
  resources = Ken.all(query)
  # => [#<Resource id="/en/star_wars_episode_iv_a_new_hope" name="Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope">,
        #<Resource id="/en/american_graffiti" name="American Graffiti">,
        #<Resource id="/en/the_star_wars_holiday_special" name="The Star Wars Holiday Special">]
</code>
</pre>

h3. Access properties attributes directly

Ken is primarily designed for inspecting resources in a generic way, what's ideal for domain independent browsing applications.
However, there are legitimate situations where you already know what you want to access.

That's why I now added direct Property/Attribute access, but only on a Type/View level:

<pre>
<code>
  resource = Ken.get('/en/new_order')
  type = resource.types[1] # => #<Type id="/music/artist" name="Musical Artist">
  # because we know _/music/artist_ has a _genre_ property we can access that directly
  type.genre # => #<Property id="/music/artist/genre" expected_type="/music/genre" unique="false" object_type="true">
</code>
</pre>

The same works for views:

<pre>
<code>
  resource = Ken.get('/en/new_order')
  view = resource.views[1] # => #<View type="/music/artist">
  # because we know _/music/artist_ has a _genre_ property we can access attribute directly as well
  view.genre # => #<Attribute property="/music/artist/genre">
</code>
</pre>

If you rather want to query based on Types and access Properties/Attributes directly you can consider using
Chris "Eppsteins Freebase Library":http://github.com/chriseppstein/freebase/tree/master as an alternative. 


h3. Low Level API

Sometimes you may want to do specific queries instead of inspecting Resources as a whole.
In such a case you would want to use Ken's low level API.

_mqlread_ works like the regular _mqlread service_, except that you are able to pass ruby hashes instead of JSON.
And you don't have to deal with HTTP, parameter encoding and parsing JSON.

<pre>
<code>
  artists = Ken.session.mqlread([{
    :type => "/music/artist",
    :id => nil, 
    :"/common/topic/webpage" => [{:uri => nil}], 
    :home_page => [{:uri => nil}], 
    :limit => 2
  }])  
  
  # => [
         {"type"=>"/music/artist", "home_page"=>[{"uri"=>"http://www.massiveattack.co.uk/"}], "id"=>"/en/massive_attack", "/common/topic/webpage"=>[{"uri"=>"http://musicmoz.org/Bands_and_Artists/M/Massive_Attack/"}, {"uri"=>"http://www.discogs.com/artist/Massive+Attack"}, {"uri"=>"http://www.massiveattackarea.com/"}, {"uri"=>"http://www.massiveattack.co.uk/"}, {"uri"=>"http://www.massiveattack.com/"}]},
         {"type"=>"/music/artist", "home_page"=>[{"uri"=>"http://www.apartment26.com/"}], "id"=>"/en/apartment_26", "/common/topic/webpage"=>[{"uri"=>"http://www.discogs.com/artist/Apartment+26"}, {"uri"=>"http://musicmoz.org/Bands_and_Artists/A/Apartment_26/"}, {"uri"=>"http://www.apartment26.com/"}]}
       ]
</code>
</pre>

h2. Project Status

h3. Features

* Fetching of single Resources
* Fetching of multiple Resources by specifying a query
* Accessing Properties/Attributes directly (on a type/view level)
* Type inspection
* Attribute inspection
* Low Level API (mqlread)
* Rails and Merb support
* Views on Resources to group Attributes based on the Resource's types

h3. Roadmap

# More tests
# Write-Support

Initial thoughts, obviously not up-to-date and not conforming to the current version, are available at "http://wiki.github.com/michael/ken":http://wiki.github.com/michael/ken.